README.md, before:

# (248) 0x1B. C - Sorting algorithms & Big O
Foundations > Low-level programming & Algorithm > Data structures and Algorithms

---

### Project author
Alexandre Gautier

### Assignment dates
06-11-2020 to 06-18-2020

### Description
Fourth team project. Introduction to popular sorting algorithms, and using big O notation to indicate time and space complexity.

### Requirements
* You are not allowed to use global variables
* Unless specified otherwise, you are not allowed to use the standard library. Any use of functions like `printf`, `puts`, … is totally forbidden.
* The following format is expected for big O notation:
  * `O(1)`
  * `O(n)`
  * `O(n!)`
  * n squared -> `O(n^2)`
  * log(n) -> `O(log(n))`
  * n * log(n) -> `O(nlog(n))`
  * n + k -> `O(n+k)`

Please use the "short" notation (don't use constants). Example: `O(nk)` or `O(wn)` should be written `O(n)`. If an answer is required within a file, all your answers files must have a newline at the end.

### Provided file(s)
* [`print_array.c`](./print_array.c)
* [`print_list.c`](./print_list.c)
* definition of `listint_t` for [`sort.h`](./sort.h)
* definitions of `kind_t`, `card_t`, `deck_node_t` for [`deck.h`](./deck.h)
* [`0-main.c`](./tests/0-main.c) [`1-main.c`](./tests/1-main.c) [`2-main.c`](./tests/2-main.c) [`3-main.c`](./tests/3-main.c) [`100-main.c`](./tests/100-main.c) [`101-main.c`](./tests/101-main.c) [`102-main.c`](./tests/102-main.c) [`103-main.c`](./tests/103-main.c) [`104-main.c`](./tests/104-main.c) [`105-main.c`](./tests/105-main.c) [`106-main.c`](./tests/106-main.c) [`107-main.c`](./tests/107-main.c) [`1000-main.c`](./tests/1000-main.c)

### Note
While found in a separate repository, this project is part of [`holbertonschool-low_level_programming`](https://github.com/allelomorph/holbertonschool-low_level_programming).

---

## Mandatory Tasks

### :white_check_mark: 0. Bubble sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Bubble sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void bubble_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `0-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Bubble sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`0-bubble_sort.c`](./0-bubble_sort.c) [`0-O`](./0-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 0-bubble_sort.c 0-main.c print_array.c -o bubble`

### :white_check_mark: 1. Insertion sort
Write a function that sorts a doubly linked list of integers in ascending order using the Insertion sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void insertion_sort_list(listint_t **list);`
* You are not allowed to modify the integer `n` of a node. You have to swap the nodes themselves.
* You’re expected to print the `list` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `1-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Insertion sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`1-insertion_sort_list.c`](./1-insertion_sort_list.c) [`1-O`](./1-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 1-main.c 1-insertion_sort_list.c print_list.c -o insertion`

### :white_check_mark: 2. Selection sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Selection sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void selection_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `2-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Selection sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`2-selection_sort.c`](./2-selection_sort.c) [`2-O`](./2-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 2-main.c 2-selection_sort.c print_array.c -o select`

### :white_check_mark: 3. Quick sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Quick sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void quick_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must implement the Lomuto partition scheme.
* The pivot should always be the last element of the partition being sorted.
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `3-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Quick sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`3-quick_sort.c`](./3-quick_sort.c) [`3-O`](./3-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 3-main.c 3-quick_sort.c print_array.c -o quick`

## Advanced Tasks

### :white_check_mark: 4. Shell sort - Knuth Sequence
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Shell sort algorithm, using the Knuth sequence

* Prototype: `void shell_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must use the following sequence of intervals (a.k.a the Knuth sequence):
    * `n + 1 = n * 3 + 1`
    * 1, 4, 13, 40, 121, ...
* You’re expected to print the array each time you decrease the interval

No big O notations of the time complexity of the Shell sort (Knuth sequence) algorithm needed - as the complexity is dependent on the size of array and gap

File(s): [`100-shell_sort.c`](./100-shell_sort.c)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 100-main.c 100-shell_sort.c print_array.c -o shell`

### :white_check_mark: 5. Cocktail shaker sort
Write a function that sorts a doubly linked list of integers in ascending order using the Cocktail shaker sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void cocktail_sort_list(listint_t **list);`
* You are not allowed to modify the integer `n` of a node. You have to swap the nodes themselves.
* You’re expected to print the `list` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `101-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Cocktail shaker sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`101-cocktail_sort_list.c`](./101-cocktail_sort_list.c) [`101-O`](./101-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 101-main.c 101-cocktail_sort_list.c print_list.c -o cocktail`

### :white_check_mark: 6. Counting sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Counting sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void counting_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You can assume that `array` will contain only numbers >= 0
* You are allowed to use `malloc` and `free` for this task
* You're expected to print your counting array once it is set up
    * This array is of size `k + 1` where `k` is the largest number in `array`

Write in the file `102-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Counting sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`102-counting_sort.c`](./102-counting_sort.c) [`102-O`](./102-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 102-main.c 102-counting_sort.c print_array.c -o counting`

### :white_check_mark: 7. Merge sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Merge sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void merge_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must implement the top-down merge sort algorithm
    * When you divide an array into two sub-arrays, the size of the left array should always be <= the size of the right array. i.e. `{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}` -> `{1, 2}, {3, 4, 5}`
    * Sort the left array before the right array
* You are allowed to use `printf`
* You are allowed to use `malloc` and `free` only once (only one call)

Write in the file `103-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Merge sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`103-merge_sort.c`](./103-merge_sort.c) [`103-O`](./103-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 103-main.c 103-merge_sort.c print_array.c -o merge`

### :white_check_mark: 8. Heap sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Heap sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void heap_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must implement the sift-down heap sort algorithm
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `104-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Heap sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`104-heap_sort.c`](./104-heap_sort.c) [`104-O`](./104-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 104-main.c 104-heap_sort.c print_array.c -o heap`

### :white_check_mark: 9. Radix sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Radix sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void radix_sort(int *array, size_t size)`;
* You must implement the LSD radix sort algorithm
* You can assume that array will contain only numbers >= 0
* You are allowed to use `malloc` and `free` for this task
* You’re expected to print the `array` each time you increase your significant digit

File(s): [`105-radix_sort.c`](./105-radix_sort.c)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 105-main.c 105-radix_sort.c print_array.c -o radix`

### :white_check_mark: 10. Bitonic sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Bitonic sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void bitonic_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You can assume that `size` will be equal to `2^k`, where `k >= 0` (when `array` is not `NULL` …)
* You are allowed to use `printf`
* You’re expected to print the `array` each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `106-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Bitonic sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`106-bitonic_sort.c`](./106-bitonic_sort.c) [`106-O`](./106-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 106-main.c 106-bitonic_sort.c print_array.c -o bitonic`

### :white_check_mark: 11. Quick Sort - Hoare Partition scheme
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Quick sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void quick_sort_hoare(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must implement the Hoare partition scheme.
* The pivot should always be the last element of the partition being sorted.
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `107-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Quick sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`107-quick_sort_hoare.c`](./107-quick_sort_hoare.c) [`107-O`](./107-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 107-main.c 107-quick_sort_hoare.c print_array.c -o quick`

### :white_large_square: 12. Dealer
Write a function that sorts a deck of cards.

* Prototype: `void sort_deck(deck_node_t **deck);`
* You are allowed to use the C standard library function `qsort`
* You have to push your `deck.h` header file
* Each node of the doubly linked list contains a card that you cannot modify. You have to swap the nodes.
* You can assume there is exactly 52 elements in the doubly linked list.
* You are free to use the sorting algorithm of your choice
* The deck must be ordered:
    * From Ace to King
    * From Spades to Diamonds

File(s): [`1000-sort_deck.c`](./1000-sort_deck.c) [`deck.h`](./deck.h)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 1000-main.c 1000-sort_deck.c -o deck`

---

## Student team
* **Samuel Pomeroy** - [allelomorph](github.com/allelomorph)

Commit message:

0x1B added README note linking back to main repo

README.md, after:

# (248) 0x1B. C - Sorting algorithms & Big O
Foundations > Low-level programming & Algorithm > Data structures and Algorithms

---

### Project author
Alexandre Gautier

### Assignment dates
06-11-2020 to 06-18-2020

### Description
Fourth team project. Introduction to popular sorting algorithms, and using big O notation to indicate time and space complexity.

### Note
This project was created in a repository separate from [`holbertonschool-low_level_programming`](https://github.com/allelomorph/holbertonschool-low_level_programming), where the other projects from this section are located.

### Requirements
* You are not allowed to use global variables
* Unless specified otherwise, you are not allowed to use the standard library. Any use of functions like `printf`, `puts`, … is totally forbidden.
* The following format is expected for big O notation:
  * `O(1)`
  * `O(n)`
  * `O(n!)`
  * n squared -> `O(n^2)`
  * log(n) -> `O(log(n))`
  * n * log(n) -> `O(nlog(n))`
  * n + k -> `O(n+k)`

Please use the "short" notation (don't use constants). Example: `O(nk)` or `O(wn)` should be written `O(n)`. If an answer is required within a file, all your answers files must have a newline at the end.

### Provided file(s)
* [`print_array.c`](./print_array.c)
* [`print_list.c`](./print_list.c)
* definition of `listint_t` for [`sort.h`](./sort.h)
* definitions of `kind_t`, `card_t`, `deck_node_t` for [`deck.h`](./deck.h)
* [`0-main.c`](./tests/0-main.c) [`1-main.c`](./tests/1-main.c) [`2-main.c`](./tests/2-main.c) [`3-main.c`](./tests/3-main.c) [`100-main.c`](./tests/100-main.c) [`101-main.c`](./tests/101-main.c) [`102-main.c`](./tests/102-main.c) [`103-main.c`](./tests/103-main.c) [`104-main.c`](./tests/104-main.c) [`105-main.c`](./tests/105-main.c) [`106-main.c`](./tests/106-main.c) [`107-main.c`](./tests/107-main.c) [`1000-main.c`](./tests/1000-main.c)

### Note
While found in a separate repository, this project is part of [`holbertonschool-low_level_programming`](https://github.com/allelomorph/holbertonschool-low_level_programming).

---

## Mandatory Tasks

### :white_check_mark: 0. Bubble sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Bubble sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void bubble_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `0-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Bubble sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`0-bubble_sort.c`](./0-bubble_sort.c) [`0-O`](./0-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 0-bubble_sort.c 0-main.c print_array.c -o bubble`

### :white_check_mark: 1. Insertion sort
Write a function that sorts a doubly linked list of integers in ascending order using the Insertion sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void insertion_sort_list(listint_t **list);`
* You are not allowed to modify the integer `n` of a node. You have to swap the nodes themselves.
* You’re expected to print the `list` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `1-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Insertion sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`1-insertion_sort_list.c`](./1-insertion_sort_list.c) [`1-O`](./1-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 1-main.c 1-insertion_sort_list.c print_list.c -o insertion`

### :white_check_mark: 2. Selection sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Selection sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void selection_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `2-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Selection sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`2-selection_sort.c`](./2-selection_sort.c) [`2-O`](./2-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 2-main.c 2-selection_sort.c print_array.c -o select`

### :white_check_mark: 3. Quick sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Quick sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void quick_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must implement the Lomuto partition scheme.
* The pivot should always be the last element of the partition being sorted.
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `3-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Quick sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`3-quick_sort.c`](./3-quick_sort.c) [`3-O`](./3-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 3-main.c 3-quick_sort.c print_array.c -o quick`

## Advanced Tasks

### :white_check_mark: 4. Shell sort - Knuth Sequence
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Shell sort algorithm, using the Knuth sequence

* Prototype: `void shell_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must use the following sequence of intervals (a.k.a the Knuth sequence):
    * `n + 1 = n * 3 + 1`
    * 1, 4, 13, 40, 121, ...
* You’re expected to print the array each time you decrease the interval

No big O notations of the time complexity of the Shell sort (Knuth sequence) algorithm needed - as the complexity is dependent on the size of array and gap

File(s): [`100-shell_sort.c`](./100-shell_sort.c)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 100-main.c 100-shell_sort.c print_array.c -o shell`

### :white_check_mark: 5. Cocktail shaker sort
Write a function that sorts a doubly linked list of integers in ascending order using the Cocktail shaker sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void cocktail_sort_list(listint_t **list);`
* You are not allowed to modify the integer `n` of a node. You have to swap the nodes themselves.
* You’re expected to print the `list` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `101-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Cocktail shaker sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`101-cocktail_sort_list.c`](./101-cocktail_sort_list.c) [`101-O`](./101-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 101-main.c 101-cocktail_sort_list.c print_list.c -o cocktail`

### :white_check_mark: 6. Counting sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Counting sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void counting_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You can assume that `array` will contain only numbers >= 0
* You are allowed to use `malloc` and `free` for this task
* You're expected to print your counting array once it is set up
    * This array is of size `k + 1` where `k` is the largest number in `array`

Write in the file `102-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Counting sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`102-counting_sort.c`](./102-counting_sort.c) [`102-O`](./102-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 102-main.c 102-counting_sort.c print_array.c -o counting`

### :white_check_mark: 7. Merge sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Merge sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void merge_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must implement the top-down merge sort algorithm
    * When you divide an array into two sub-arrays, the size of the left array should always be <= the size of the right array. i.e. `{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}` -> `{1, 2}, {3, 4, 5}`
    * Sort the left array before the right array
* You are allowed to use `printf`
* You are allowed to use `malloc` and `free` only once (only one call)

Write in the file `103-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Merge sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`103-merge_sort.c`](./103-merge_sort.c) [`103-O`](./103-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 103-main.c 103-merge_sort.c print_array.c -o merge`

### :white_check_mark: 8. Heap sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Heap sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void heap_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must implement the sift-down heap sort algorithm
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `104-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Heap sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`104-heap_sort.c`](./104-heap_sort.c) [`104-O`](./104-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 104-main.c 104-heap_sort.c print_array.c -o heap`

### :white_check_mark: 9. Radix sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Radix sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void radix_sort(int *array, size_t size)`;
* You must implement the LSD radix sort algorithm
* You can assume that array will contain only numbers >= 0
* You are allowed to use `malloc` and `free` for this task
* You’re expected to print the `array` each time you increase your significant digit

File(s): [`105-radix_sort.c`](./105-radix_sort.c)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 105-main.c 105-radix_sort.c print_array.c -o radix`

### :white_check_mark: 10. Bitonic sort
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Bitonic sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void bitonic_sort(int *array, size_t size);`
* You can assume that `size` will be equal to `2^k`, where `k >= 0` (when `array` is not `NULL` …)
* You are allowed to use `printf`
* You’re expected to print the `array` each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `106-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Bitonic sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`106-bitonic_sort.c`](./106-bitonic_sort.c) [`106-O`](./106-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 106-main.c 106-bitonic_sort.c print_array.c -o bitonic`

### :white_check_mark: 11. Quick Sort - Hoare Partition scheme
Write a function that sorts an array of integers in ascending order using the Quick sort algorithm

* Prototype: `void quick_sort_hoare(int *array, size_t size);`
* You must implement the Hoare partition scheme.
* The pivot should always be the last element of the partition being sorted.
* You’re expected to print the `array` after each time you swap two elements

Write in the file `107-O`, the big O notations of the time complexity of the Quick sort algorithm, with 1 notation per line:

* in the best case
* in the average case
* in the worst case

File(s): [`107-quick_sort_hoare.c`](./107-quick_sort_hoare.c) [`107-O`](./107-O)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 107-main.c 107-quick_sort_hoare.c print_array.c -o quick`

### :white_large_square: 12. Dealer
Write a function that sorts a deck of cards.

* Prototype: `void sort_deck(deck_node_t **deck);`
* You are allowed to use the C standard library function `qsort`
* You have to push your `deck.h` header file
* Each node of the doubly linked list contains a card that you cannot modify. You have to swap the nodes.
* You can assume there is exactly 52 elements in the doubly linked list.
* You are free to use the sorting algorithm of your choice
* The deck must be ordered:
    * From Ace to King
    * From Spades to Diamonds

File(s): [`1000-sort_deck.c`](./1000-sort_deck.c) [`deck.h`](./deck.h)\
Compiled: `gcc -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic 1000-main.c 1000-sort_deck.c -o deck`

---

## Student team
* **Samuel Pomeroy** - [allelomorph](github.com/allelomorph)
